Complete Java Program Execution Process
Step 1: Writing the Source Code
Who: Developer (You!)

What Happens:

The programmer writes a Java source code file (.java) using a text editor or an IDE (e.g., IntelliJ, Eclipse).

Step 2: Compilation (Converting .java to .class)
Who: Java Compiler (javac)

What Happens:

The source code is checked for syntax errors.

If valid, the Java Compiler translates the .java file into bytecode (.class), which is platform-independent.

Example:

bash
javac MyProgram.java  # Generates MyProgram.class
Step 3: Class Loading into JVM
Who: Class Loader (Part of JVM)

What Happens:

Loads the .class file into memory.

Places class metadata (like method definitions, static variables) into the Method Area.

Divides class loading into:

Bootstrap Class Loader (Loads core Java classes like java.lang.*).

Application Class Loader (Loads user-defined classes).

Step 4: Memory Allocation
Who: JVM Memory Manager

What Happens:

Heap: Stores objects created with new.

Stack: Stores local variables and method calls.

Method Area: Stores class-level static data and code.

Step 5: Bytecode Execution
Who: Execution Engine (Part of JVM)

What Happens:

The Interpreter converts bytecode to machine instructions line-by-line (slower).

The JIT Compiler (Just-In-Time Compiler) optimizes frequently used code by compiling bytecode into native code for better performance.

Step 6: Running Methods & Managing Memory
Who: JVM Stack & Heap Manager

What Happens:

When a method is called, a stack frame is created in the Stack.

If an object is required (new keyword), it is allocated in the Heap.

Once a method completes, its stack frame is removed.

Step 7: Garbage Collection
Who: Garbage Collector (GC, part of JVM)

What Happens:

Identifies and removes unused objects from the Heap to free up memory.

Prevents memory leaks and optimizes performance.

Step 8: Program Completion
Who: JVM Shutdown Process

What Happens:

The main method (main()) finishes execution.

The JVM clears the Stack and Heap memory.

The program terminates.